# Partitioning and horizontal scaling in Azure Cosmos DB
Azure Cosmos DB uses partitioning to scale individual containers in a database to meet the performance needs of your application. 
In partitioning, the items in a container are divided into distinct subsets called logical partitions. 
Logical partitions are formed based on the value of a partition key that is associated with each item in a container. 
All the items in a logical partition have the same partition key value.

⚛️ For example, a container holds items. Each item has a unique value for the UserID property. 
If UserID serves as the partition key for the items in the container and there are 1,000 unique UserID values, 1,000 logical partitions are created for the container.

## Logical partitions
- A logical partition consists of a set of items that have the same partition key. For example, in a container that contains data about food nutrition, all items contain a foodGroup property. You can use foodGroup as the partition key for the container. 
  Groups of items that have specific values for foodGroup, such as Beef Products, Baked Products, and Sausages and Luncheon Meats, form distinct logical partitions.
- A logical partition also defines the scope of database transactions.
- When new items are added to a container, new logical partitions are transparently created by the system. You don't have to worry about deleting a logical partition when the underlying data is deleted.
- There is no limit to the number of logical partitions in your container.

## Physical partitions
- A container is scaled by distributing data and throughput across physical partitions.Internally, one or more logical partitions are mapped to a single physical partition.
- Unlike logical partitions, physical partitions are an internal implementation of the system and they are entirely managed by Azure Cosmos DB.
- The number of physical partitions in your container depends on the following:
 
     1️⃣ The number of throughput provisioned (each individual physical partition can provide a throughput of up to 10,000 request units per second). The 10,000 RU/s limit for physical partitions implies that logical partitions also have a 10,000 RU/s limit, as each logical partition is only mapped to one physical partition.

     2️⃣ Each partition can store up to 50GB of data and can provide throughput up to 10,000 request units per second (RU/s). 
     
     
>Physical partitions are an internal implementation of the system and they are entirely managed by Azure Cosmos DB. When developing your solutions, don't focus on physical partitions because you can't control them. Instead, focus on your partition keys. If you choose a partition key that evenly distributes throughput consumption across logical partitions, you will ensure that throughput consumption across physical partitions is balanced.

## Managing logical partitions
- Azure Cosmos DB transparently and automatically manages the placement of logical partitions on physical partitions to efficiently satisfy the scalability and performance needs of the container. As the throughput and storage requirements of an application increase, Azure Cosmos DB moves logical partitions to automatically spread the load across a greater number of physical partitions
- ⚛️ Azure Cosmos DB uses hash-based partitioning to spread logical partitions across physical partitions. 
  Azure Cosmos DB hashes the partition key value of an item. The hashed result determines the physical partition.
- ⚛️ Transactions (in stored procedures or triggers) are allowed only against items in a single logical partition.

## What is a partition key?
- A partition key is the value by which Azure organizes your data into logical divisions. It should aim to evenly distribute operations across the database to avoid hot partitions. A hot partition is a single partition that receives many more requests than the others, which can create a throughput bottleneck.
- ⚛️The storage space for the data associated with each partition key can't exceed 20 GB, which is the size of one physical partition in Azure Cosmos DB. 
- if your single userID or productId record is going to be larger than 20 GB, think about using a composite key instead so that each record is smaller. An example of a composite key would be userID-date, which would look like CustomerName-08072018. This composite key approach would enable you to create a new partition for each day a user visited the site.
- You can't add a partition key to an Azure Cosmos DB container after it has been created.

##  Choosing a Partition Key
For each Azure Cosmos DB container, you should specify a partition key that satisfies the following core properties:

✔ Have a high cardinality. This option allows data to distribute evenly across all physical partitions.

✔ Evenly distribute requests. Remember the total number of RU/s is evenly divided across all physical partitions.

✔ Evenly distribute storage. Each partition can grow up to 20 GB in size.
